 Peck 1
Deserae Peck
Paola Brown
ENG 102
3 March 2008
 Female circumcision is also known, more accurately, as female genital mutilation
and female genital cutting (FGC.) There are three forms of FGC. The first is a
clitoridectomy, the cutting and/or removal of the hood of the clitoris and all or part of the
clitoris. The second is an excision which removes the clitoris, the hood, and the labia
minor (the inner folds of the vulva that is responsible for producing lubrication.) The
infibulation is the third and most radical which also removes everything in the excision
along with the labia majora, the outer folds of the vulva. Once removed the sides of the
vulva are sewn together leaving a small hole (about pencil size) for the flow of
menstruation and urine. The tradition of FGC dates back more than 1000 years and is
practiced in parts of Asia, the Far East, Europe, Asia, South America, and even amongst
certain ethnic groups in the United States.
 Aisha Abdel Majid tells of her experience in an interview with Rogaia Mustafa
Abusharaf, an anthropologist born in Sudan, in her article “Unmasking the Tradition of
Female Circumcision.” Majid describes her cutting is when she was only 6 years old. She
recalls being taken by her mother and two aunts to the midwife in the neighborhood known
for performing circumcisions. She is told that she is going to be purified. Upon this
realization Aisha tries to break free but is forced down and ordered onto a bed of ropes
with a hole in the middle. She accounts, 
 Peck 2
“They held me tight while the midwife started to cut my flesh without anesthetics. I
screamed till I lost my voice. The midwife was saying to me, ‘Do you want me to
be taken into police custody?’ After the job was done I could not eat, drink or even
pass urine for three days. I remember one of my uncles who discovered what they
did to me threatened to press charges against his sisters. They were afraid of him
and they decided to bring me back to the midwife. In her sternest voice she ordered
me to squat on the floor and urinate. It seemed like the most difficult thing to do at
that point, but I did it. I urinated for a long time and was shivering with
pain.”(Abusharif pgs 1-2)
Aisha continues on though it took her a long time to recover looking back now over forty
years later she understands the motivations of her mother wanting her to be clean, but it
was a lot of anguish. Clearly, female circumcision is an inhumane practice justified with
ignorant beliefs and false benefits.
This is one testimony similar to millions of instances that occur each year.
According to 3 separate studies published in Bioethics details the severity of the type of
circumcisions varied greatly by region. A study in Sierra Leone found that thirty nine
percent of females had undergone the clitoridectomy, sixty percent the excision, and about
1 percent the infibulations. The same year, 1982, a study was done in Somalia eighty
percent of the operations were the excision. The article also includes a study done in 1993
that found “the pervasiveness of genital mutilation in Africa ranged from 10 percent in
Tanzania to 98 percent in Djibouti”(Circumcision pg1.) Regardless of how evasive the
genital cutting done the low estimate found in a clinical report from The Alan Guttmacher
Institute more than 100 million women have had some level of FGC. It is also estimated 2 
 Peck 3
million more girls from ages four to twelve years old will be cut annually. A motivational
factor behind this testimony was for purification.
Purification is one of the traditional beliefs of why FGC is necessary. The word for
circumcision in traditional Arabic is tahara meaning to purify. While FGC occurs in
varying religions it is most strong in the Islam religion and is believed to be requirement by
many Muslims. The Koran, the bible of Islam, however nowhere in it refers to female
circumcision. Mohammed, the god of the Muslims, declared rights for women although
they are to be considered below men. Mohammed displayed humanity toward females
when he banned the old Arabic pre-Islam practice of burying undesired female babies
alive. The Koran cites in the following verse, “Sura 2:228,” that women have rights too
“…Women shall with justice have rights similar to those exercised against them, although
men have a status above women. God is mighty and wise” (qtd. in Voula pg2.) Therefore,
the justification via religious beliefs is unfounded confirmed by the main.java.main offending
religions messiah himself.
 Another commonly held belief behind FGC is that there is some form of medical
benefit to the girl. In Nigeria there are ethnic groups that believe if a baby comes into
contact with the clitoris during childbirth the baby will die. Others believe the clitoris will
grow to be penis like and drag on the ground. Female genitalia are believed by some to be
poisonous to sperm and must be removed to maintain fertility. None of these beliefs are
true; in fact FGC has quite the opposite effect on fertility and the health of the girls.
Infertility can in truth be a medical complication caused by the cutting. The death of a
child does not happen due to contact with a clitoris in the birth, but the obstructed labor as
a result of the cutting can cause the baby to be born with brain damage or even dead. In a 
 Peck 4
clinical report done in accordance with classification designed by the World Health
Organization the studies show, “Infants born to women who had undergone the moderately
severe and most severe types of mutilation were more likely to have required resuscitation
at deliver…and more likely to have died while their mother was an inpatient… than infants
born to women who had not had genital mutilation.” (Not Just Skin pg 3.) While the
clitoris is formed with similar nerve tissue that develops into the penis, this is often why the
removal of the clitoris is compared to the equivalent of removal of the penis, the clitoris
does not grow into a dangling penis like mass. The complications range from immediate to
long term including hemorrhaging, the inability to urinate, tetanus, pelvic inflammation,
cysts, scar tissue, tumors, chronic urinary tract infections, bladder and kidney stones, and
death. These medical complications demonstrate the horrific effects of FGC on the
health of the girl and obviously do not present a benefit as those who practice FGC believe.
A result of FGC is not only painful intercourse, but likewise decreased sexual
pleasure. This lack of a sexual appetite is one reason given for justification of the
procedure. If a woman does not undergo the procedure she is believed she will be loose
and promiscuous. The FGC is considered a safeguard against casual and premarital sex.
The belief that a woman will be unable to control her sexual desire lest she is mutilated is
unreasonable. The belief places all the responsibility of sexual promiscuity on the female
and leaves the male unaccountable for his role in the sexual exchange. This belief again
displays the fear and ignorance embedded around FGC.
The US Federal Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act of 1995 protects us in
the US from these abusive forms of treatment however not every country holds the same
belief system. While it is true the tradition of FGC has long roots in history and hold 
 Peck 5
important cultural meanings it does not justify the harm inflected on the innocent. The
rationalization of justification by tradition does not take away the wrong doings in
abolished practices such as slavery, hangings, the burning of people at the stake, human
sacrifice, and cannibalism all of which at some point were an accepted traditional behavior
by varying cultural beliefs.
Three of the main.java.main beliefs for the practicing of FGC have been dispelled including
religion, health benefits, and sexual control. It is through education of the women and the
cultural that may be bring about change. The higher the education of a woman the less
likely she is to have her child undergo the cutting. Through education and support from the
US and other countries may future daughters, children, and wives be safe from mutilation.